Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopes and
today I'm joined by a return guest, Doctor Carl
Freston. Last time we talked a lot about the
free energy principle and today we're going to talk
about how a free energy pri The framework applies
to culture, the relationship between the free energy principle
and embodied cognition and more generally for ecognition and
some other related topics. So, Doctor Friesen, welcome back
to the show. It's always a pleasure to everyone.
It's a pleasure to be back. Thank you for
inviting me. So,
let's start by talking here a little bit about
culture. So, uh how, or how would you say
a free energy principle framework applies to culture? I
mean, how do you approach culture through that framework?
The most obvious way would be to apply the
free energy principle to cultural niche construction. So by
by which I mean Acknowledging that not only are
we trying to fit our environments, but by acting
upon the environments we are also constructing many important
aspects of those environments, those niches, and of course
because we're doing it together, these niches are co-constructed,
so the application of the free energy principle in
that setting really reduces to how do I navigate
my world. In order to reduce uncertainty. In the
special circumstance that this world is occupied by lots
of things that are like me and some of
other things that are not like me, and how
do I make it as predictable as possible and
of course once one has that imperative, namely reducing
uncertainty by rendering your eco niche cultural, social, or
physical more predictable, then you have a Principled motivation
for things like belief sharing, communication that can be
either direct in terms of what we're doing now,
actually sharing ideas and beliefs. Offloaded my poster beliefs
so that you could understand them, um, or indirectly
by the environment. Uh, SO, you know, my favorite
example of that is, um, The desire path or
the elephant path, so the appearance of trodden worn
grass in shortcuts that people take to their favorite
destinations. So strictly speaking this is an attribute of
the environment, and yet it was caused by my
action and your action and in Installing or changing
the environment in this particular way, I've implicitly created
a cue or a sign or some evidence in
the environment that you can now use to infer,
well, if I take this path, I'm going to
get to where I want to go, or at
least where things like me usually want to go
more efficiently and more more quickly, and you can
take that idea and generalize it to. Uh, THINGS
that we explicitly design, and I'm referring obliquely here
to Andy Clark's notion of the designer environment, such
as, um, signs, traffic lights. Books, language, and culture
of a more general sort, things that make our
life more predictable, more sustainable, and easier to navigate.
Mhm. And what, what happens when we face people
with different ideas because from a free energy principle
perspective, we have the goal of reducing surprise and
uncertainty, correct?
Yeah, that's a really good question, very prescient given,
you know, current political and geopolitical situations. So Most
of my understanding of the answer to that question
inherits from numerical simulations, agent-based simulations, where crucially the
agents are equipped with active inference, which simply means
that they behave in a way that Um, solicits
information from other people or the environment or the
population, um, in which they find themselves. That reduces
our uncertainty about the states of affairs and the
situation in which they find themselves. In doing that,
you have to, um, Decide who you're going to
ask, who you're going to talk to. So this
is one aspect of the epistemic affordances that we
were, we've talked about previously, the choosing those behaviors
and maximize your expected information gain. So you have
to make a decision about what quality of information
am I going to get if I ask this
person. In other words, I have to evaluate the
epistemic trust that I place in this source of
information, be it a person, an institution, a news
channel, a social media source. I am therefore in
the very difficult situation of selecting among a number
of different sources of information which could be other
people and those other people have to be evaluated
in terms of how trustworthy are they in terms
of providing. UNAMBIGUOUS, precise information that will enable me
to resolve my uncertainty about states of affairs. What
am I going to do in terms of evaluating
their trustworthiness? Well, one obvious thing is if they
look like me and talk like me, then they
are likely to share the same understanding of the
world and have the kind of knowledge that is
going to be useful for me in terms of
resolving my uncertainty. So I'm going to have to
make an inference about whether you are like me
or not. So to put that very simply, are
you with my group or are you in another
group? If I can make that inference, then I
can choose who to listen to. So one gets
to this situation where there's a paradox. On the
one hand, I am going to choose to listen
to those people who are likely to agree with
me because we have a shared narrative, a shared
generative model, some common ground in the way that
we understand the world, and I'm going to effectively
induce an echo chamber or we are collectively going
to induce an echo chamber. But remember, we're also
quintessentially curious because we are also also chasing information.
We're acting in a way to maximize information gain.
So I'm going to be quite curious about you,
even if I don't infer that you are like
me. So there's always going to be this tension,
and when you simulate these, um, um, ensembles or
populations of active influence, uh, agents that are all
exchanging ideas or commitments or beliefs or ideologies, then
what tends to happen is that the, uh, only,
you could say, evolutionary steady state or sustainable state
is roughly a fifty-fifty split. So if one group
is too small, it will be basically absorbed into
the other group, but there is a stable solution
where one half of the population believes one thing
and the other half of the population believes another.
So they can both be And enjoy mutual predictability
within their own group but also sate their curiosity
by occasionally listening to the other group that I
find a really quite appealing description of exactly where
we find ourselves, whether it's Trump versus Biden, Brexit
versus Remain. Wherever you look, the only stable polarization
is basically a 50/50 split.
Right. By the way, you used at a certain
point, the word narrative there. What does that mean
in the context of the free energy principle?
I was just using it basically to describe a
belief about the succession of outcomes in which I
participate. So technically this will be written down in
simulations as a policy. There's a sequence of actions
that each follow each other. And the choice of
those actions depends upon the expected information gain and
the expected value of each of those outcomes given
a particular action at this point in the sequence,
and that combination is the expected free energy. So
we in being authentic agents. We necessarily have to
have a world model or a generative model of
the consequences of our actions to be able to
evaluate the goodness of any given action in terms
of the expected free energy conditioned upon that particular
action. And moreover, it is a sequence of actions.
So that sequence of navigating or stepping through various
scenarios, a tree of consequences, I'm using the word
narrative. It's like a story of my immediate future.
Mhm. So, changing topics, how do you look at
the relationship if, if there's any between the free
energy principle and 4E cognition?
I think there's a very, very close relationship. I
mean, you could argue that certainly, you know, one
application of the free energy principle, namely active inference,
is quintessentially embodied because it's all about using your
body to act upon the world. So that the,
you know, certainly that that embodied and inactivist aspect
is inherent in the mechanics, sometimes referred to as
Bayesian mechanics that underwrites active inference. The extended and
embedded nature, I think is also subsumed. When applying
active inference in exactly the way that we're just
discussing, say, to cultural niche construction or just niche
construction generally, that the way that I make sense
of my world determines how I evaluate the consequences
of my actions and therefore my action upon the
world and the action upon the world changes the
world, which means that my sense making and decision
making actually becomes installed in my world, in my
environment. So in one sense my cognition, my cognitive
processes become extended into the world. Again, I'm appealing
to the writings of people like Andy Clark, you
know, insofar as I can plan to retrieve a
phone number from my iPhone. I don't have to
remember that cognitively, but I do know where it
is because it's now in my environment, so I
have effectively embedded my cognition or it is now
extended into the environment, and again one could apply
loosely similar arguments to the co-constructed environment that comprises
deontic signs for, for example, elephant paths, desire paths,
traffic lights, or signs in general on the roadside.
Mhm. Uh, WOULD the free energy principle also apply
to artificial systems, artificial intelligence, and things like that?
Um, YES, no, it, it could certainly, uh, be,
uh, be applied. I mean, the free energy principle
is just a description, um, of things that have
characteristic states and act in a way to sustain
themselves within those states. So if you can find
anything. That can be labeled semantically or you can
individuate from its environment, then you are licensed to
apply the free energy principle to it, including a
computer, including a robot, and including any artifact, you
could actually apply the free energy principle to a
thermostat. Um, THE question would that have uh artificial
intelligence of the kind that one would, um, Anticipate
seeing in, you know, something like you and me
at the moment I think not, although there are
lots of arguments about large language models at the
moment precisely, you know, do they share the same
narrative that we share? Do they have the same
kind of understanding that, that, that, that, that, that
we have? But you can certainly apply the free
energy principle to a large language model, um, and
indeed, um, the whole. The point of large language
models is that they not only use prediction to
generate the next word, but also they are very
predictable in the sense that they recapitulate things that
we've spoken or written or draw, drawn previously. So
yeah, I, I certainly think you can apply the
free entry principle to any artifact, natural or artificial.
Is that, does that mean that all of these
things engage, um, Intelligently in active inference, and I
think that would really depend upon how you define
active inference. If you're, um, defining active influence in
its full sense of engaging agency through a minimization
of expected free energy, then I'd say no. You,
you, there are only a certain number of things
that, that have that kind of authentic agency, um,
and thereby have that kind of intelligent behavior. Um,
SO put that very simply, if your artifact. Plans,
then I would say that it has the kind
of intelligence that you would get with, uh, what
some people record to, well, what some people refer
to as not merely reflexive active inference of the
kind you might find in a thermostat or a
Watts governor. So. You, if you're asking, can you
use the free energy principle to build truly intelligent
or authentically intelligent embodied artifacts, yes, you can, but
you'd have to equip these artifacts with a generative
model of the consequences of their action. And in
so doing, they'd have to have the capacity to
act. They'd have to have the capacity to ask
questions, to move. To select data of their own
choice as opposed to you providing the data. Is
that what you were chasing?
Yes, it was. So moving now a little bit
to a few questions that are more related to
physics. Does the free energy principle relate in any
way? And if so, how to quantum mechanics and
general relativity?
Yes, um, in some interesting ways. Um, SO, A
The broad answer to your question is that the
free energy principle. Inherits exactly from the same physics
that underlies quantum mechanics, statistical mechanics, and classical mechanics
that would include, um, general relativity. Um, In the
sense that the Bay mechanics that defines the free
energy principle follows exactly the same mathematics and laws
that are found in the other kinds of mechanics
such as quantum mechanics, statistical, or more specifically stochastic
mechanics and Lagrangian or classical mechanics. So, um, there's
a, a, a, a deep connection between the free
energy principle and its emergence in these other kinds
of mechanics, for example, you know, the, um, in
thermodynamics, you could, um, argue that this is, um,
the homologue of, uh, the minimization of Helmholz free
energy. In information theory, there's a much closer relationship
between the free energy principle and Jane's maximum entropy
or path entropy principle, also known as the maxent
or max cal. The distinction is a bit subtle
but relatively simple in the sense that the max
caliber principle applies to paths, mathematical narratives, as you
roll out into the future or Uh, uh, or
back into the past. Um, SO that's a deep
connection. In terms of specifically quantum, uh, mechanics and,
and, and relativity, um, if you apply the free
energy principle, um, There, although you can apply it
in a scale-free way, there is a certain scale
dependence, which basically means that the balance between the
deterministic predictable behavior and the more random stochastic dissipative
kind of behavior that one sees in systems changes
as the scale increases. So one way of looking
at that would be to think about, um, Your
dynamics of any system. Being comprised of two parts.
One part would be a deterministic evolution of flow.
So mathematically if I'm at one point in some
phase space, then the flow determined by some, say,
vector field at that point will take me to
another point in state space and then to another
point and then to another point. And again this
is what I mean by a narrative, it's just
a sequence of being in different states. Um, BUT
that, um, that flow is also subject to random
fluctuations. So there's two parts to my flow. There's
a dissipated part which is due to the random
fluctuations, and there's a non-dissipative part, sometimes called a
solenoidal part to the flow. Which, uh, usually, because
I have to keep on returning to my characteristic
states goes around in circles. It's, um, referred to,
uh, well, that is one perspective on why it's
called solenoidal flow. Now Think about the different contributions
of this dissipative and non-disipative or divergence free or
solenoidal flow as we move from very small things
to very big things for very, very small things,
the random fluctuations dominate. So everything is fluctuating very
fast, very, very with a high amplitude randomness of
fluctuations, and that's the world of the microscopic, that's
the world of the quantum scale. So everything. Disappears
before you can measure it. Everything disappears or dissipates
before you can observe it, so you can only
describe things in terms of probability distributions or wave
functions in quantum physics. Um, ONCE you appreciate, you
can only describe things in terms of wave functions,
and you just think about the structure and the
nature of these wave functions. For example, having, uh,
putting a wave of a certain wavelength around a
ring, you suddenly realize that you can only. Either
3 of these or 4 of these wavelengths into
this ring, uh, and therefore you get this quantum,
uh, quantum aspect that just comes from the fact
you have to describe things probabilistically simply because, uh,
they're not observable. But as you get bigger and
bigger and bigger, The random fluctuations average themselves away.
And they get smaller and smaller and smaller and
smaller until when you get very, very big, say
the size of the moon, there are almost no
random fluctuations and all the behavior is solenoidal. So
you now have a picture of classical mechanics or
grangian mechanics in which you have the circulation of
the heavenly bodies around each other. So you've still
got, you know, the same mathematics, but the balance
of the dissipative and non-dissipative part has has changed
profoundly. Now in the middle. Things of your size
beyond, say, single molecules or indeed single cells, but
multicellular organization that is sufficiently large. Then you've got
both things in play. You've got your, you now
yourself trying to maintain yourself within this attracting set
by the solenoidal actively keeping on this attracting set
through active inference through the self evidencing or Baying
mechanics and resisting the random fluctuations in an environment
that can sometimes be quite, quite chaotic and random.
So we're not like the moon, but we're also
not like, um, uh, particles below the, you know,
the, the quantum scale. So, can you apply quantum,
um, quantum mechanics, um, or can you, um, apply
the free energy to quantum mechanics? No. Quantum mechanics
is quantum mechanics, free energy principle is Bay mechanics.
They both can be cast as principles of least
action. Uh, THEY both inherit from, uh, the work
of Richard Feynman in, in the sense that they're
both, uh, can be characterized in terms of variation
free energy, but they're talking about different things. Um,
Can you apply quantum information theory? I think you
can, and there's been a lot of work done
by my friend and colleague Chris Fields attempting to
apply the holographic principle to translate or to frame
the free energy principle as as the principle of
unitarity by effectively treating. What the free energy principle
would regard as a mark of blanket, which is
the set of states that separate me from the
rest of my world, effectively my inputs and outputs
by which I exchange with the world, otherwise known
as sensory and active states. But if we just
lump the sensory and active states together, that provides
a set of inputs and outputs across which I
am open to my world. If you replace that
with something called the holographic screen, then you can
use the argument, the holographic principle, that everything you
need to know or everything that is knowable about
the internal bulk, say my brain is expressed on
the Markov blanket. It is expressed via my sensory
impressions, but also crucially my action upon upon the
world. So he's developed a very beautiful calculus and
Um, applies category theoretic, uh, arguments and, um, uh,
can derive lots of, um, quite, um, engaging conclusions
from this quantum information theoretic formulation, the free energy
principle. So there, there is a, I think, a
deep connection between quantum information theory and the free
energy principle. But there's a, uh, despite the common
roots, there is a fundamental distinction between quantum mechanics
and, and Bayesian mechanics. In terms of, uh, uh,
general relativity, with respect to general relativity, um, I,
I personally haven't dealt with that very deeply, but
there is an interesting limiting case of very big
things under this Markov blanket partition that defines things
or particles and the states of particles in which
if you associate Sensory and active states with velocity
and position respectively, you can now derive classical mechanics
or Lagrangian mechanics around certain probability distributions that define
the characteristic states of these systems expressed in terms
of their blanket states, namely their position and velocity.
And then you can derive classical mechanics and also
with an adjustment to the definition of the attracting
sets, one can then just borrow the equations from
general relativity and express it as the same kind
of mechanics.
Mhm. And I, I mean, sort of related to
physics as well, do you think that free energy
itself can be a theory of everything?
Um, YES, um, but with a twist, so it's
a theory of every space thing. Um, SO the
free energy principle rests upon the individuation or separation
of a subsystem, a particle, a person or population
from everything else. So If one induces this separation
statistically in the form of a Markov blanket. That
itself inherits from sparse coupling among states of any
given universe, then you now have a definition of
thinness. And with that definition you can now say
should that thing persist and have for a non-trivial
amount of time characteristic states to which it is
confined, technically a pullback a tractor, and then you
can apply the free energy principle. So if you
start a repeat from the definition of a thing,
then the free energy principle is a principle of
everything that exists. So
and is free energy fundamental in the metaphysical sense?
Um, THAT'S an interesting question, um. From the point
of view of the information theory, um, you could
argue it's not, um, in the sense that, um,
if one just. Turns to its instantiation in the
work of Richard Feynman as a bound on the
what's called self-information or the negative log probability of
a path or being in a particular state and
at any instant in time then because it's a
bound, it is not in and of itself the
metaphysical self-information or the, or the probability. Um, AND
you could even argue that the probability of something
being in some state, uh, is itself not metaphysically
real. It's just a probabilistic description. However, I would
not argue that. I would argue that all of
physics, all of reality, is just an expression of
the, um, the dynamics of probability densities from quantum
mechanics through to the way that we infer our,
our, you know, infer our world, uh, through the
application of the, of the free energy principle. Um.
So you could argue, I think, that, that free
energy in the sense of the free energy principle
that we're talking about here, um, is not metaphysically
real. Could you make the same arguments for thermodynamic,
free energy? Um, I, I think you probably could
actually, uh, in the sense that, you know, these
things depend upon ensemble averages and the probability distributions.
This is where they come from, um. So, um,
you know, is a probability that, you know, uh,
real in a metaphysical sense, um, in the sense
that does it have to be, if you like,
um, encoded by an observer. So, This brings you
to the other perspective that if you want a
way of describing something observing something that is metaphysically
real, then yes, the free energy could be construed
as, um, depending, um, on a metaphysical reality in
the sense that you are observing it. So this
speaks to, um, something that we started off by
talking, uh, uh, talking about, but. It, it depends,
um, it rests upon a commitment to reality as
observed, as, as measured, as inferred. So this is
very close to sort of the relational formulation of
quantum mechanics, for example. It's all about the observation,
um, and certainly as people like, um, Carlo Rovelli
would, you know, would argue, um. A lot of
the paradoxes of quantum mechanics just dissolve when you
realize that the measurement is the thing itself, so
you can't talk about Bob and Alice looking at
something because, well, you can, but you have to
now realize there are now 3 things in the
game, and whatever Bob and Alice think about their
observations, it cannot be assumed to be the same
thing. So I think that the um The, the
answer to your question is that the free energy,
uh, as a functional of a probability distribution is
in and of itself not a metaphysically real thing,
but it only exists when there is some observer
of some metaphysical reality. Mhm.
So, I have just one last question then, can
we get a new understanding of death through a
free energy framework?
Of death. Yes. That's a very morbid question. And
you nearly asked it with a straight face as
well, right? Yes, yes, certainly you can. Uh, um,
AND it's a, it's a rather, um, um, trivial
answer, but perhaps it will make it more interesting
by referring to mortal computation. Um, SO, um, on
the point of view, the free energy principle, um,
Is the dissolution or the loss of your Markov
blanket, uh, that necessarily implies a um uh a
loss of the, um, Attracting set that confines the
way that you move around your state space, which
means that you will dissipate. So death mathematically in
this instance can be described in lots of D
words so that you, you will decay. You would,
uh, desiccate if you were dry, you would dissipate,
you would dissolve. All of these things are descriptions
of a loss or collapse of your attracting set
and inherently your Markov blanket. So if your attracting
set goes away, your self-information or your, um, your,
um, Surprisal that defines the kinds of states that
you occupy your characteristic states no longer exists. You
lose your Markov blanket. There is no difference between
you and the rest of the universe, and you
diffuse, decay. Dissipate, dissolve into the universe. So, um,
and the characteristic, you know, if you do retain
your Markov blanket for a short period of time,
um, then that attractive set will now collapse to
a single point. And now, and that's interesting from
a physics perspective because when you collapse to a
single point, then you're now moving from the physics
of, uh, non-equilibrium steady states. To equilibrium steady states
and now the second law applies and classical physics
applies, but only when you are converging to a
pointer tractor and normally, well, you may not be
dead, but you would be, you may be petrified
in the sense. Be turned into stone. So if
you were a stone, you have a pointer tractor.
So you, you, you, you, you, um, uh, you
don't have this solenoid or circular itineracy to your
dynamics, you just keep returning to the, this, this,
this same point, um. So On that view, death
is exactly what is meant by um Um things
that exist avoid death in the sense that things
that exist have this sustainable attracting set for a
non-trivial amount of time, and after that non-trivial amount
of time they die because that set no longer
exists because they, because they are now drawn away
from or fail to maintain the occupancy of that
attracting set or pull back a tractor. More entertainingly,
I think you can talk about mortal computation. So,
um, I could also ask you, um, well, I
could answer your question, um, what is death? Uh,
WELL, death is an attribute of things that are
mortal. What kinds of things are we talking about,
of interest? Well, we're talking about things that infer,
measure, observe, and compute. So we are talking about
things in the real world that are mortal computers.
So what's an immortal computer? Well, immortal software, according
to, um, people like Geoffrey Hinton, is software that
can be run on any substrate, uh, on any
machine. So the software itself. It is immortal in
the sense that it cannot die. So that means
that introduces the interesting question, can you ever have
immortal software, or are we examples of immortal software?
And I think most people, certainly the 4E perspective,
the embodied perspective, would say absolutely not. No, the
whole point is that are mortal computers. We are
an instance of mortal computation as an inference process,
and that inference process actually depends and is installed
in the very physiology and the physics and the
material of our embodied brain.
Great. So I think we've covered a lot of
ground in our two interviews, Doctor Freston. So just
before we go now, would you like to tell
people again where they can find you and your
work on the internet?
I think you asked me that last time and
I think I said no, no, no, I'm trying
to be a recluse, so I'm very happy to
talk to you and I enjoyed talking to you,
but otherwise I'm, I'm trying to, I try to
avoid exposure, but thank you for the invitation anyway.
OK, thank you so much. Hi guys, thank you
for watching this interview until the end. If you
liked it, please share it, leave a like and
hit the subscription button. The show is brought to
you by Nights Learning and Development done differently, check
their website at Nights.com and also please consider supporting
the show on Patreon or PayPal. I would also
like to give a huge thank you to my
main patrons and PayPal supporters Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns,
Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf, Alex Adam Castle, Matthew
Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis, Erika Lenny, John Connors,
Philip Fors Connolly. Then the Matri Robert Windegaruyasi Zup
Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield governor Michael Stormir Samuel
Andrea, Francis Forti Agnseroro and Hal Herzognun Macha Joan
Lays and the Samuel Corriere, Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore,
Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan Wilson, Asila dearraujoro
and Roach Diego Londonorea. Yannick Punteranrusmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara
Adamhn Pavlostaevskynalebaa medicine, Gary Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John
Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre
Francaortolotti Gabrielon Scorteus Slelisky, Scott Zacharyish Tim Duffyani Smith
John Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke
Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams,
the Augusta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior,
Old Heringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy
Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander
Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John
Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson,
Mike Levine, and Jos Net. A special thanks to
my producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik,
Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz
and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers, Matthew
Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you
for all.